.. _app_iaga_2002:

IAGA2002 INTERMAGNET Exchange Format (Spreadsheet compatible)
-------------------------------------------------------------

This ASCII Exchange Format, adopted in August 2001 and revised in
December 2001, July 2003 and in August 2011, is intended as a data
exchange format for geomagnetic data (samples and means) from
observatories and variometer stations at time intervals from millisecond
up to and including monthly means. The format comprises:

- Twelve (12) mandatory file header records.
- Unlimited optional comment records.
- One (1) mandatory data header record.
- A series of data records.
- **Every record is 70 characters long** plus the machine-dependent
  carriage return/line feed.

Pad records with spaces if needed. Data records report exactly 4
magnetic field elements (DHIF, DHZF, XYZF, or DHIG, DHZG, XYZG where G =
DF).

Use missing data values (8's or 9's) if fewer than 4 elements are
available.

The 12 Mandatory File Header Records
````````````````````````````````````

Mandatory header and optional comment records begin with a space
character in column 1 and end with the vertical bar \| (ASCII 124) in
column 70. Content labels begin in column 2 and descriptions begin in
column 25.

- This **format** is designated IAGA-2002.
- **Source of Data** is the name of the institute responsible for
  collecting the data.
- Please spell the entire **station name**; do not use abbreviations.
  Capitalize the first letter.
- The **IAGA Code** is the official IAGA 3-letter station code. It
  should be in capital letters and correspond to the IAGA list of
  magnetic observatories.
- Location of the station is reported to the one thousandth degree in
  **geodetic latitude** (positive north) from -90 to 90 degrees and in
  **geodetic longitude** (positive east) -180 to 180 or 0 to 360
  degrees. Geographic location is reported using WGS-84 datum
- Report **elevation** in meters above mean sea level.
- **Reported** refers to the magnetic field elements contained in the
  data record, **in the order recorded in data record**. Valid values
  are DHIF, DHZF, and XYZF (or DHIG, DHZG,and XYZG where G = DF). Use
  E/V instead of D/I for declination/inclination given in intensity
  units (ONLY if data type is variation).
- **Sensor Orientation** is the physical orientation of the observing
  instruments, i.e. XYZF, HDZ.
- **Digital Sampling** is the rate (in seconds) of the data sampling of
  the magnetic field sensor (instrument) or the digitizing interval for
  analogue data.
- **Data interval** type is the mean or instantaneous time interval of
  the data. Common values include 1-minute (00:30-01:29), 1-minute
  (00:00-00:59), 1-hour (00-59), 1-day (00-23) and 1-month (01-31); the
  last day could also be 30, 29, or 28. There are many possible
  intervals, including a fraction of a second (instant value), averages
  by 1-second (501-1500), 1- second (0-1000), 10 second, or 2.5 minute.
  **Define the type of mean and how values are centered in the comment section.**
- **Data type** is provisional (P), definitive(D), quasi-definitive
  (Q), or variation (V).
- **Publication date** (optional) is the date when the data is
  published. This was added in June 2015. The inclusion of this line is
  (#13) optional but desirable for the modern data. The old data files
  cannot be modified (e.g. Publication date 2014-10-20).

The Optional Comment Header Records
```````````````````````````````````

Use these records to record important information concerning the data
that is not contained in the defined fields. Types of information may
include the type of means and how the mean values are centered,
important gaps in the data record, or explanations of missing values (9
filled element field).

- Every record begins with a space character in column 1 and # (hash or
  number sign) in column 2.

- The end of each record is indicated with a vertical bar \| (ASCII
  124) in column 70.

- For transmission of incomplete day files include two additional
  optional comment headers stating the start time and duration in
  seconds. These records must have the form:

   - Start Time hh:mm:ss
   - Duration-in-seconds sssss

- If the data file contains absolute values (Data Type provisional or
  definitive), include the formula for computing the missing
  (non-reported) magnetic elements. For example, if an observatory
  reports XYZF, the comments should contain the formula for computing
  HDI (see sample data header and data record for 1-minute values).

- If the data file contains variometer values without considering base
  line values (Data Type variation), formula and constants are to be
  given to convert the recorded magnetic elements into others or to
  convert angular units into nT or vice versa. The possible conversions
  are:

      - E = D \* Ha \* arc(1')
      - V = I \* Fa \* arc(1')
      - X = H \* cos(Da) – E\* sin(Da)
      - Y = H \* sin(Da) + E\* cos(Da)
      - Z = F \* sin(Ia) + V \* cos(Ia)
      - F = Z \* sin(Ia) + H \* cos(Ia)
      - H = X \* cos(Da) + Y \* sin(Da) = F \* cos(Ia) – V \* sin(Ia)
      - E = Y \* cos(Da) – X \* sin(Da)
      - V = Z \* cos(Ia) – H \* sin(Ia)

  X, Y, Z, H, F, E, V in nT; D, I in minutes of arc

  arc(1') = 2.9089E-04 = 0.00029089

  Ha, Fa, Da, Ia : approximate values of H, F, D, I (eg the most recent
  annual mean value or a value from the IGRF)

  The formula and constants are to be given in additional optional
  comment header lines (see sample data header and data record for 1-second values).

The Mandatory Data Header Record
````````````````````````````````

The mandatory data-header record contains column headers useful for
multi-station analysis. Elements, both type and order, are indicated in
the file-header field Reported.

- The date and time headers are DATE, TIME, and DOY (day of year).
- The magnetic element headers comprise 4 letters: 3 letters for the
  observatory IAGA code and 1 letter for the magnetic element reported.
  Valid values are H, D (or E), I (or V), X, Y, Z, F (or G). The column
  headers are space delimited.
- The end of each record is indicated with a vertical bar \| (ASCII 124) in column 70.

The Data Records
````````````````

The data records contain the date, time, and magnetic field elements
reported. Report data to the least significant digit. Indicate missing
data with 99999 to the corresponding accuracy for a given
component(e.g., 99999.00). If an element is not observed, please record
(to the corresponding accuracy for a given component) 88888 in that
field. The format for field elements is 4(1X, F9.2). Each record is
exactly 70 characters long plus the machine dependent carriage return /
line feed.

- DATE is the calendar date in ISO YYYY-MM-DD format (4-digit year,
  month as 01-12, day as 01-31).
- TIME is in ISO hh:mm:ss.sss format (hour as 0-24, minute as 0-59,
  second as 0-59 Note: if the hour is 24, the minute and second must be
  0). Values beyond the time interval of the means being reported must
  be zero-filled.
  i.e. 14:01:00.000 for 1 minute data for the 14th hour, first minute.
  Describe the method of average, i.e., centered to the hour for hourly
  means, in the comments area.
- DOY is the day of the year, from 1 - 365 (or 366 for leap years).
- D and I are reported in angular units of minutes of arc to the
  precision of the instruments. F, H, X, Y, Z, E, G, and V are reported
  in nanotesla and a fraction of nT.

Recommended File Name Procedure
````````````````````````````````

To improve the ease with which data are exchanged and recognized, IAGA
recommends the following guidelines and style for naming files
containing magnetic observatory data. The recommendations closely follow
the current International Standards Organization (ISO) Level II
recommendations, and are fully compliant with both the Joliette
extension to Level II and to the proposed modifications for the ISO
standard. These recommendations are for data exchange and do not
necessarily apply to data archive. Some changes have been made in this
section in July 2003 to allow for existence of multiple fragments of
data starting at different times (which is a possibility for some data
transmission systems) and to ease usage with compression programs.

- File names are composed of two parts, the base name and a
  three-character extension. A full stop (period) separates the base
  from the extension. The base name may be up to 27 characters long.
  The extension is exactly three characters (total file name length not
  to exceed 31 characters). This format is sometimes referred to as the
  "27.3" format. BASENAME (1 to 27 characters) "." EXTENSION (3
  characters). Ex. my_file_name.dat
- File names are composed of lower case a-z, 0-9, underscore "_", and
  dash "-" characters. No spaces, unusual characters (i.e. \*, /, \\,
  :, ;, ?) or upper case characters allowed.
- File names must begin with the IAGA 3-Letter Code, Date, and Type of
  data. The Extension defines the Data Interval (monthly, daily,
  hourly, minute, or second data). The Extension is duplicated in the
  last three characters of the base name, so that if the Extension is
  stripped on compression the Data Interval is not lost. The file name
  only indicates the general data interval, specific information is
  contained in the file header Data Interval field (i.e. 2.5 and
  1-minute averages are both "minute" data, 10 second averages and 1
  second instantaneous are both "second" data).
- The first several characters in the base name are strictly defined.
  Files may be further defined with the remaining characters by using
  an underscore "_" to separate the standard name. For example,
  naq20020101d.min and naq20020101d_2-5.min are both acceptable names
  for 2.5 minute definitive data from Narsarsuaq.

General format: iagyyyymmddtint.int

Where:

- iag = IAGA 3-letter observatory code
- yyyy = four digit year (i.e. 2002)
- mm = two digit month (i.e. 01 for January, 12 for December)
- dd = two digit day of month (01-31)
- t = type of data (p - provisional, d - definitive, q -
  quasi-definitive v - variation)
- int = data interval (mon - monthly, day - daily, hor - hourly, min -
  minute, sec - second)

.. tabularcolumns:: |p{2cm}|p{2cm}|p{1cm}|p{3cm}|p{4cm}|

.. table::
    :widths: auto
    :align: center

    ======= ============= ===== =================== ===================
    Comment Data Interval Files File name pattern   Example name
    ======= ============= ===== =================== ===================
    1       Monthly       Year  iagyyyytint.int     naq2002dmon.mon
    2       Daily         Year  iagyyyytint.int     naq2002dday.day
    3       Hourly        Month iagyyyymmtint.int   naq200201phor.hor
    4       Minute        Day   iagyyyymmddtint.int naq20020101pmin.min
    5       Second        Day   iagyyyymmddtint.int naq20020211vsec.sec
    ======= ============= ===== =================== ===================

#. File contains 1 year of definitive monthly data for 2002 from
   Narsarsuaq.
#. File contains 1 year of definitive daily data for 2002 from
   Narsarsuaq.
#. File contains 1 month of provisional hourly data for January 2002
   from Narsarsuaq.
#. File contains 1 day of provisional minute data for 1 January 2002
   from Narsarsuaq.
#. File contains 1 day of variation second data for 11 February 2002
   from Narsarsuaq.

Additional format to handle multiple fragments of data starting at
different times:

iagyyyymmddhhMMsstint.int

Where:

- iag = IAGA 3-letter observatory code
- yyyy = four digit year (i.e. 2002)
- mm = two digit month (i.e. 01 for January, 12 for December)
- dd = two digit day of month (01-31)
- hh = hour at which data starts (00-23)
- MM = minute at which data starts (00-59)
- ss = second at which data starts (00-59)
- t = type of data (p - provisional, d - definitive, v - variation)
- int = data interval (mon - monthly, day - daily, hor - hourly, min -
  minute, sec - second)


.. tabularcolumns:: |p{1.5cm}|p{2cm}|p{1.5cm}|p{4.5cm}|p{4cm}|

.. table::
    :widths: auto
    :align: center

    ======= ============= ======== ========================= =========================
    Comment Data Interval Files    File name pattern         Example name
    1       Minute        Part-day iagyyyymmddhhMMtint.int   clf200306121320vmin.min
    2       Second        Part-day iagyyyymmddhhMMsstint.int clf20030612132000vsec.sec
    ======= ============= ======== ========================= =========================


#. File contains part-day of 1-minute variation data from CLF for 12
   June 2003, starting at 13:20
#. File contains part-day of 1-second variation data from CLF for 12
   June 2003, starting at 13:20:00

Sample of IAGA-2002 Format July 2003 Revision
`````````````````````````````````````````````

Sample Data Header and Data Record for 1-minute Values
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. highlight:: none

::

      Format                 IAGA-2002                                    |
      Source of Data         Danish Meteorological Institute              |
      Station Name           Narsarsuaq                                   |
      IAGA Code              NAQ                                          |
      Geodetic Latitude      61.160                                       |
      Geodetic Longitude     314.560                                      |
      Elevation              4                                            |
      Reported               XYZF                                         |
      Sensor Orientation     DIF                                          |
      Digital Sampling       0.01 seconds                                 |
      Data Interval Type     Filtered 1-minute (00:30 - 01:29)            |
      Data Type              Definitive                                   |
      # This area is where the data source or distributor can include     |
      # any additional information needed for proper use of data. For     |
      # example, the observers name and contact, notes on a change of     |
      # instrumentation, reasons for missing data values, definition of   |
      # observed values, geomagnetic location of the observatory, etc.    |
      # This area should also contain the formula for computing the non-  |
      # reported elements and components of the INTERMAGNET binary        |
      # format which do not fit elsewhere. These include:                 |
      # D-conversion:                                                     |
      # = H/3438*10000.                                                   |
      # which is word 8 in the INTERMAGNET binary format and is used      |
      # to convert variations of D in minutes of arc <-> nT. Please       |
      # note that all of the header records and comment records begin     |
      # with a space in column 1, end with a | (ASCII 124), and are       |
      # padded with spaces - never with tabs.                             |
      # H = squareroot(X*X + Y*Y), cos D = X/H, sin I = Z/F               |
     DATE       TIME         DOY     NAQX      NAQY      NAQZ      NAQF   |
     2001-03-13 00:00:00.000 072     10800.11 -6100.23   53381.51  54801.12
     2001-03-13 00:01:00.000 072     10800.31 -6100.20   53381.51  54801.12
     2001-03-13 00:02:00.000 072     10801.11 -6101.23   99999.00  54801.12
     2001-03-13 00:03:00.000 072     10803.12 -6100.23   99999.00  54801.12


Sample Data Header and Data Record for Hourly Values
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""


| The header record for Data Interval Type might read:
| Data Interval Type 1-hour (00 - 59). Note filler for non-reported element.

::

     DATE       TIME         DOY     NAQX      NAQY      NAQZ      NAQF   |
     2001-03-13 00:00:00.000 072     10800.11 -6100.23   53381.51  88888.00
     2001-03-13 01:00:00.000 072     10800.31 -6100.20   53381.51  88888.00
     2001-03-13 02:00:00.000 072     10801.11 -6101.23   53381.50  88888.00
     2001-03-13 03:00:00.000 072     10803.12 -6100.23   99999.00  88888.00


Sample Data Header and Data Record for Monthly Values
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""


| The header record for Data Interval Type might read:
| Data Interval Type 1-month (01 - 31). Note filler for non-reported element.


::

    DATE       TIME         DOY     NAQX      NAQY      NAQZ      NAQF   |
    2001-01-15 00:00:00.000 015     10800.11 -6100.23   53381.51  88888.00
    2001-02-14 00:00:00.000 045     10800.31 -6100.20   53381.51  88888.00
    2001-03-15 00:00:00.000 074     10801.11 -6101.23   53381.50  88888.00
    2001-04-15 00:00:00.000 105     10803.12 -6100.23   99999.00  88888.00


Sample Data Header and Data Record for 1-second Values
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. highlight:: none

::

    Format                 IAGA-2002                                    |
    Source of Data         Danish Meteorological Institute              |
    Station Name           Narsarsuaq                                   |
    IAGA CODE              NAQ                                          |
    Geodetic Latitude      61.160                                       |
    Geodetic Longitude     314.560                                      |
    Elevation              4                                            |
    Reported               HEZF                                         |
    Sensor Orientation     HEZF                                         |
    Digital Sampling       1 seconds                                    |
    Data Interval Type     1-second instantaneous                       |
    Data Type              Variation                                    |
    # This area should contain additional information needed            |
    # in order to transform the reported elements. For the data in this |
    # sample information about the declination at the observatory is    |
    # needed in order to tranform the variation data from HEZ to the    |
    # widely used XYZ orientation. Also information about the value of  |
    # horizontal field H can be useful to convert E-variations in nT to |
    # variations in minutes of arcs.                                    |
    # E = D * Ha * 0.00029089                                           |
    # Ha = 17123.45                                                     |
    # X = H * cos(Da) B E* sin(Da)                                      |
    # Y = H * sin(Da) + E* cos(Da)                                      |
    # Da = 312.89 minutes of arc                                        |
   DATE       TIME         DOY     NAQH      NAQE      NAQZ      NAQF   |
   2001-03-13 00:00:00.000 072       800.11   -100.23    381.51  54801.12
   2001-03-13 00:00:01.000 072       800.31   -100.20    381.51  54802.32
   2001-03-13 00:00:02.000 072       801.11   -101.23  99999.00  54803.22
   2001-03-13 00:00:03.000 072       803.12   -100.23  99999.00  54803.43


Sample Data Header and Data Record for 5-Millisecond Values
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""


| The header record for Data Interval Type might read:
| Data Interval Type 5-millisecond (instantaneous values). Note filler for missing element.

.. highlight:: none

::

    DATE       TIME         DOY     NAQX      NAQY      NAQZ      NAQF   |
    2001-03-13 00:00:00.000 072     10800.11 -6100.23   53381.51  99999.00
    2001-03-13 00:00:00.005 072     10800.31 -6100.20   53381.51  99999.00
    2001-03-13 00:00:00.010 072     10801.11 -6101.23   53381.50  54801.12
    2001-03-13 00:00:00.015 072     10803.12 -6100.23   99999.00  54801.12
